So far we've seen that when we pass a parameter to a function the default is passed by value.
That means a copy of the actual parameter is made.
We also saw that when we pass an array into a function we don't make a copy.
Instead we use the location of the array which means we can change it from within the function.
Well sometimes we want to be able to change an actual parameter from within a function as we saw with
the race.
This is achieved by passing in the location of the actual parameter.
We can do this in C++ for any variable type.
Not just arrays by using reference parameters reference parameters create an alias.
So now the formal parameter in the function is an alias to the actual parameter.
No copy is made when you change the form a parameter you're changing the actual parameter.
This is called pass by reference and it's really easy to achieve in C++ by using the ampersand symbol
in the parameter list.
Let's see an example in this example we have a function named scale number.
Notice that the parameter list to the function is not an int named num it's a reference to an int named
name.
That's what the ampersand does.
So now when we use nummy in the function body we're referencing the actual parameter.
Let's walk through this.
In main we declare an integer number and initialize it to 1000.
Then we call the scale number function and pass in the actual parameter number.
We now transfer control to the scale number function.
Since the formal parameter and the scale number function is a reference parameter.
This means that number is an alias for number.
If we change num we're changing number.
Behind the scenes the location of number is being passed into the function.
So the code and scale number checks to see if the number is greater than 100.
In this case it is it's 1 0 0 0 0 0.
So we set number to 100 and the function completes.
When we returned to Main and display number it will display 100 passed by reference can be super useful
for several reasons.
First it allows us to change an actual parameter if we need to.
Second we don't make a copy of the parameter which could be large and take time but we have to be aware
of potentially unwanted changes.
Let's see how we could swap two numbers using pass by reference in this example we're reading a function
that swaps the values of the two integers passed into it.
Take a look at main x is 10 and Y is 20 x and y are first displayed.
And we get 10 20 just as we expect then we call swap in passing x y then we display X and Y again another
20 and 10 we swap them.
Look at the function definition and notice that both A and B are reference parameters.
So when I call this function with x and y a and b become alias's to X and Y respectively in the body
of the function I set temp to A then A to B and then B to temp and we've swapped the two values that
were passed into us.
What do you think would happen if we didn't use pass by reference and we use pass by value.
Well the actuals would be comping.
So we would swap the copies in the function and then return when we get back to main the actuals haven't
changed since we were working with copies.
Let's talk a bit about how parameters are passed into functions.
Let's see what happens when we pass in a vector object to a function.
In this case I have a function called print and it expects a vector of integers.
Notice that in this case we're using pass by value inside the print function.
I simply use a range base for loop and display the vector elements pretty easy but there's one issue
with this code that is we're using pass by value.
So we're making a complete copy of the vector object in the function.
So the formal parameter V will be a copy of the actual parameter data.
In this case in order to make a copy we need to allocate storage and copy values over if the vector
is very large.
We could run it to performance and storage issues.
So why don't we use pass by reference instead.
So we can avoid the copy.
Let's do it.
Notice that now I'm using pass by reference.
Since I've declared the formal parameter V as a reference parameter using the ampersand the output of
this program is exactly the same as before.
But we avoid the storage and copy overhead of pass by value but there is one issue since I'm using pass
by reference the print function could change the value of the vector.
It could even erase the entire vector.
This is probably not a good idea.
So let's tell the compiler that this is a constant reference.
So I've added the Konst keyword to the parameter.
Now I've told the compiler to use pass by constant reference.
So if I try to make any changes to the formal parameter V in the function I will get a compiler error.
This is really the best of both worlds since we're more efficiently passing information to the function.
But we're still ensuring that the function can't change the data by mistake.
Let's head over to the ID and see this in action.
OK said I'm in the idea and I'm in the section Levan workspace and the pass by reference project.
This is the same project that we use when we did pass by value.
The only thing I've changed is I've made the parameters reference parameters now.
So you can see the way I did that was just by including that ampersand.
Now these are the same function prototypes have just named the functions passed by ref 1 rather than
passed by value as we had before.
OK so I've got three passed by reference functions and just a simple print vector function that displays
a vector element by element passed by reference one expects a reference to an integer pass by reference
to a reference to a string passed by reference 3 a reference to a vector and then the print vector function
expects a reference to a constant vector because I don't want to be able to change the vector from the
print function.
Now I've implemented all of these functions and basically the code hasn't changed from before I set
number 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 and I set the string to changed and I clear all the elements out of there.
Now I remember before we printed a value we called the function we came back and the old value was still
there.
Well now it's totally different because we're passing an alias to the value.
OK so let's go through these examples here and then I've got initialized to 10.
And another initialised to 20.
So now what I'm doing is I'm calling pass by ref 1 and I'm passing them into it.
So before I call it I expect this to display a 10 but then after I call it I don't expect the 10 anymore
because I passed a reference.
Instead if you look at pass by ref one number is a thousand.
So I expect number to change.
All right so let me run this and then we'll walk through exactly what's going on.
There you go before calling pass by ref 1 we have a 10 after calling pass by ref 1 we have 1000 if you
remember the way it was with call by value we had 10 and 10.
So let's see what's really going on here.
Scroll up just a little bit.
Erica OK.
So I'm in Maine and I've got is 10
and I'm just playing it right here right.
So that's going to display a 10 in that out put statement right here.
But then I'm calling pass by ref.
So I want to call passed by ref 1 over here and it has a variable and if you remember what that variable
was scroll up it's right here is also called numb.
Maybe this could be any other name.
They just happened to be the same name in this case.
So that's kind of variable and they're called numb and right here.
What's happening is when I pass this name into it then this number now becomes an alias to that name.
OK and again don't worry about the names.
I'm going to use a different name next time.
But it's common to many times use the same names.
Don't let that confuse you.
And then in here I'm saying number equals I believe it is a thousand.
So what's happening is this is an alias to this number.
So this guy's going to change to a thousand.
Real real different to call by value.
OK.
So in this case we are really passing in the location of the number behind the scenes and what we don't
have to worry about it because syntactically it's the same as call by value.
Let's take a look at another example here.
Scroll down just a little bit.
And here we've got the same call to pass by ref 1 except we're passing in another number right in this
case and the name is 20.
So this will display a 20.
And when I get back it will have changed also also there it is 10 one thousand.
Now we've got another name was 20 and now it's a thousand.
So you can see that we're passing that by reference and the alias is actually referring to the actual
parameter.
That's the important part to really understand here.
In this example let's take a look at that.
If you recall this one scroll up just a little bit.
You can see it right here past my ref to expects a reference to a string and it just assigns changed
to that string.
OK.
So let's walk through this one to see what we can expect in this case.
I've got this variable right here name which is frank and it's in main
and it's a string object right then I call pass by ref too.
So here's pass by ref to and it has a variable over there called s.
That's the formal parameter.
And what we're doing here is we're passing by reference.
So we're passing name over here and this s will now be an alias to name.
So it's really referring to the actual parameter.
Remember this right here is the actual parameter.
So now when I change this to change nothing happens over here it's actually happening over here.
So this has gone.
It's now changed.
So when this function is done my actual parameter has changed in this case to changed.
OK so let's run this example and we'll be able to see that that string really does change.
You see that right there name before calling pass by ref to is Frank named after calling pass by ref
to has changed pretty easy.
It's really up to you.
And when you're designing do you need the actual changed or not.
If you do need a change do you pass it by reference if you don't need to change.
You do pass by value sometimes passed by value is very expensive as I mentioned before you want to pass
by reference and then qualified to be constant.
And that's what we'll do in the print function a little bit.
But let's take a look at this one here.
OK.
So this is the last example we'll look at right here.
Remember we're calling pass by ref 3 and pass by ref 3.
All it does is clears out that vector.
So it's going to remove all the vector elements to make the vector empty.
OK so let's do that.
All right.
So we're here.
This is Stooges and again Stooges is declared in main.
So Stooges is basically three strings Larry Moe and Curly.
And they're in a vector.
OK so now I'm going to print the vector and I'm going to pass Stooges into print vector.
Now the vector is also expecting a reference.
In this case a constant reference so I can't change anything.
So what happens is when I call print
so when I call print vector there is a variable over there called V and since I'm doing pass by reference
this refers to this.
So whenever I deal with I do any operation on V it's affecting the Stooges vector.
Right.
That would be the case but since this is Konst This is read only.
There's no changes allowed.
But do I avoid the whole copy issue which is important.
All right so that takes care of print.
Now when I call pass by reference 3 I do exactly the same thing right.
So I call passed by by reference 3.
I've got my vector and it's also pointing to Stooges.
Now when I say V-Rod clear I'm clearing this out now.
Right so Stooges is empty now when this function is done it's gone.
And my vector is empty so when I print it out again right here you'll see nothing print.
If you recall in the past by value a printed out Larry Moe and Curly again right here nothing.
So let's run this
and you could see right here Stooges before calling pass by ref 3 Larry Moe Curly after calling it empty.
Why is it empty.
Because pass by ref 3 cleared out that vector and deleted all the elements.
And because I'm passing by reference it's really affecting the actual object.
If I didn't want this to happen I would make this contest in which case this won't compile anymore because
you're not allowing me to change the vector which is what this is doing.
You'll get a lot of chances to play with this in the challenge at the end of the section but that's
passed by reference.
We can use it with simple primitive types so we can use it with object types.
It basically works the same way.
Just think of it as an alias to the actual parameter.